Add sharing deps tutorial (#675)
NixOS/nix.dev: source/tutorials/learning-journey/sharing-dependencies.md

# Sharing dependencies between `default.nix` and `shell.nix`

<!-- Include any foreward you want here -->

## Overview

### What will you learn?

In this tutorial you'll learn how not to repeat yourself by sharing dependencies between 'default.nix`, which is responsible for building the project, and `shell.nix`, which is responsible for providing you an environment to work in.

### How long will it take?

This tutorial will take approximately 1 hour.

### What will you need?

This tutorial assumes you've seen a derivation (`mkDerivation`, `buildPythonApplication`, etc) before, and that you've seen `nix-shell` used to create shell environments.
While this tutorial uses Python as the language for the example project, no actual Python knowledge is requried.

## Setting the stage
Suppose you have a working build for your project in a `default.nix` file so that when you type `nix-build` in your shell it builds your project.
It includes all of the dependencies needed to build it, but nothing more.

> Now suppose you wanted to bring in some tools during development, such as a linter, a code formatter, etc.

Reviewer: Git commit hooks is a good one to mention (e.g. https://github.com/cachix/pre-commit-hooks.nix)

There is a better way!

## Getting started

Create a directory called `shared_project` and enter it:
```console
$ mkdir shared_project
$ cd shared_project
```

You'll be creating a Python web application as an example project, but don't worry, you'll be given all of the code you need and won't need to know Python to proceed.

Create a file `app.py` with the following contents:
```python
from flask import Flask

app = Flask(__name__)

@app.route("/")
def hello_world():
    return "<p>Hello, World!</p>"
```
This creates a web application that returns `<p>Hello, World!</p>` on the `/` route.

Next create a `pyproject.toml` file with the following contents:
```toml
[build-system]
requires = ["setuptools", "setuptools-scm"]
build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

[project]
name = "shared_project"
version = "0.0.1"
```
This file tells Python how to build the project.

For the Nix part of the project you'll create two files: `build.nix` and `default.nix`.
The actual build recipe will be in `build.nix` and `default.nix` will import this file to perform the build.

First create a `build.nix` file like this:
```nix

> {
>   python3Packages,
> }:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  buildPythonApplication,
  setuptools-scm,
  flask,
}:
```

python3Packages.buildPythonApplication {
  pname = "shared_project";
  version = "0.0.1";
  format = "pyproject";

>   src = builtins.path { path = ./.; name = "shared_project_source"; };

Reviewer: Maybe we could point out here why we do this?

Reviewer 2: Hmm, is that really a concern/on topic for this?

Is your goal to show best practices whenever possible? My fear is that in this case, it adds cognitive overload.

  propagatedBuildInputs = with python3Packages; [
    setuptools-scm
    flask
  ];
}
```
The Nix expression in this file is a function that takes `python3Packages` as input and produces a derivation.
This method of defining builds is a common design pattern in the Nix community, and is the format used throughout the `nixpkgs` repository.
This particular derivation builds your Python application and ensures that `flask`, the library used to create the web application, is available at runtime for the application.

Finally, create a `default.nix` that looks like this:
```nix
let

>   pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {};

Reviewer: Good practice:
```suggestion
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    # Avoids impurities
    config = {};
    overlays = [];
  };
```

Reviewer 3: Also avoid angle brackets. This will also prevent accidental CI breakages and automatically piling up stale store paths once we start testing code samples.

in

>   pkgs.callPackage ./build.nix {}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  {
    build = pkgs.python3Packages.callPackage ./build.nix {};
  }
```

Reviewer: Better as a convention since it allows you to add more packages later, also done like this [here](https://nix.dev/tutorials/learning-journey/packaging-existing-software#a-new-command)

```
The `callPackage` function reads the expression in `build.nix` to determine which inputs it needs (in this case, python3Packages), then calls the expression with the inputs that were requested.
You can read more about `callPackage` in the [Nix Pills][nix_pills_callpackage].

[nix_pills_callpackage]: https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/callpackage-design-pattern.html

> If you should now be able to build the project with the `nix-build` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now be able to build the project with the `nix-build -A build` command.
```

> If you now execute the `nix-shell` command you should also be put into a shell with the `python3` and `flask` commands available.

Reviewer: But then `nix-shell -A build` would have to be used, or not mention it yet at all

## Adding development packages
As mentioned above, you'll want to add some development packages, but you won't want to add them to `build.nix` or `default.nix`.
It's time to create a `shell.nix`.

> Create the following `shell.nix` file:

Reviewer: Done with a `default.nix`:
```nix
let
  pkgs = ...;
  build = ...;
in {
  inherit build;
  shell = pkgs.mkShell { ... };
}
```

Then in `shell.nix`:
```nix
(import ./default.nix).shell
```

Then `nix-shell` works.

Then later extend the `default.nix` to have arguments to customize the shell/build:

```nix
{ enableDebugging ? false, optimise ? false }:
...
```

Then change the `shell.nix` to
```nix
(import ./default.nix { }).shell
```

Then one can do `nix-shell --arg enableDebugging true`, or `nix-build --arg optimise true`.

Reviewer: That would then require declaring a Nixpkgs import twice:
```nix
# default.nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {};
in {
  foo = pkgs.callPackage ./foo.nix {};
}
```

```nix
# shell.nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {};
  build = import ./default.nix;
in pkgs.mkShell {
  inputsFrom = [ build ];
  packages = [ ... ];
}
```

Which then causes problems when you decide to want to update Nixpkgs, because now you need to update it in two places. This could be fixed by having a `common.nix` file containing all the common expressions needed for both the build and the shell, but that's getting a bit complicated then.

Author: Having thought about this for a bit I still think having `default.nix` be a function is outside the scope of the tutorial, especially given that in this case it only really takes `pkgs` as an argument. It may be a better pattern in the long run, but it feels unnecessary when the "project" being worked on in the tutorial is ~10 lines of Python.

I wouldn't be opposed to creating a "parameterized builds" tutorial/recipe. It probably works best as a recipe given that you can really quickly demonstrate how to make it work and what the benefits are.

Finally, the `packages` attribute is where you list any executable packages that you'd like to be available in your shell.
In this case you've included the `flake8` linter and the `black` formatter.

## Testing out the shell
Enter the shell with the `nix-shell` command, then verify that you have the `flake8` and `black` programs available:
```console
$ nix-shell
...lots of output from the build
$ which flake8
/nix/store/vmp3jii75jqmi7vi9mg3v9ackal6wl4i-python3.10-flake8-6.0.0/bin/flake8
$ which black
/nix/store/q9vw01b2jz8h7kjq603hs3lz90i4d6d8-python3.10-black-23.1.0/bin/black
```
These are the Nix store paths on the author's machine at the time of writing.
You will likely see different store paths and versions depending on when you execute these commands and the architecture of the machine that the commands are executed on.

Now you'll test that the commands actually work.
Edit the `app.py` file to look like this:
```python
from flask import Flask

app = Flask(__name__)
@app.route("/")
def hello_world():
    foo       = "bar"
    return "<p>Hello, World!</p>"

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host="0.0.0.0", port=8080)
```

> Note that the file no longer has two blank lines between the `app = ...` line and the `@app.route("/")` line.

Reviewer 2: Cf. https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/pull/679

> Note that the file no longer has two blank lines between the `app = ...` line and the `@app.route("/")` line.

Author: Not something I'd want to block on, but I support having line numbers as long as they don't get copied when a user selects a code block to copy it.

> Note that the file no longer has two blank lines between the `app = ...` line and the `@app.route("/")` line.

Reviewer 2: The PR got merged :)

# Sharing dependencies between `default.nix` and `shell.nix`

<!-- Include any foreward you want here -->

## Overview

### What will you learn?

> In this tutorial you'll learn how not to repeat yourself by sharing dependencies between 'default.nix`, which is responsible for building the project, and `shell.nix`, which is responsible for providing you with an environment to work in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this tutorial you'll learn how not to repeat yourself by sharing dependencies between `default.nix`, which is responsible for building the project, and `shell.nix`, which is responsible for providing you with an environment to work in.
```

### How long will it take?

This tutorial will take approximately 1 hour.

### What will you need?

> This tutorial assumes you've seen a derivation (`mkDerivation`, `buildPythonApplication`, etc) before, and that you've seen `nix-shell` used to create shell environments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial assumes you're familiar with Nixpkgs build helpers (`mkDerivation`, `buildPythonApplication`, etc) and know how to create environments for `nix-shell`.
```

Ideally though this would just link to tutorials you should have done, if they exist.

While this tutorial uses Python as the language for the example project, no actual Python knowledge is requried.

## Setting the stage

Suppose you have a working build for your project in a `default.nix` file so that when you run `nix-build` it builds your project.
It includes all of the dependencies needed to build it, but nothing more.

> Now suppose you wanted to bring in some tools during development, such as a linter, a code formatter, [git commit hooks][git_hooks], etc.
> 
> [git_hooks]: https://github.com/cachix/pre-commit-hooks.nix

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now suppose you wanted to bring in some tools during development, such as a linter, a code formatter, [git commit hooks], etc.

[git commit hooks]: https://github.com/cachix/pre-commit-hooks.nix
```

You can use the bare reference, ain't that cool?

One solution could be to add those packages to your build.

> This would certainly work in a pinch, but now your build depends on packages that aren't necessary for it to actually build.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This would certainly work in a pinch, but now your build depends on packages that aren't actually required.
```

A better solution is to add those development packages to a shell environment so that the build dependencies stay as lean as possible.

However, now you need to define a `shell.nix` that not only provides your development packages, but can also build your project.
In other words, you need a `shell.nix` that brings in all of the packages that your build depends on.
You could certainly copy the build dependencies from `default.nix` and copy them into `shell.nix`, but this is less than ideal:

> your build dependencies are defined in multiple places, and aside from repeating yourself there's now the possiblity that the dependencies in `default.nix` and `shell.nix` may fall out of sync.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
your build dependencies would be defined in two places.
Maintaining duplicate declarations in `default.nix` and `shell.nix` opens the possibility for them to diverge, producing surprising results.
```

There is a better way!

## Getting started

Create a directory called `shared_project` and enter it:

```console
$ mkdir shared_project
$ cd shared_project
```

You'll be creating a Python web application as an example project, but don't worry, you'll be given all of the code you need and won't need to know Python to proceed.

Create a new directory called `src` and two empty files inside of `src` called `__init__.py` and `app.py`:

```
$ mkdir src
$ touch src/__init__.py
$ touch src/app.py
```

Copy the following contents into `app.py`:

```python
from flask import Flask

app = Flask(__name__)

@app.route("/")
def hello_world():
    return "<p>Hello, World!</p>"
```

This creates a web application that returns `<p>Hello, World!</p>` on the `/` route.

Next create a `pyproject.toml` file with the following contents:

```toml
[build-system]
requires = ["setuptools", "setuptools-scm"]
build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

[project]
name = "shared_project"
version = "0.0.1"

[project.scripts]
app = "app:main"
```

This file tells Python how to build the project and what will execute when you run the executable called `app`.

> For the Nix part of the project you'll create two files: `build.nix` and `default.nix`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the Nix part of the project you'll create two files: `package.nix` and `default.nix`.
```

We may want to call it `package.nix` or maybe `shared_project.nix`, because that file essentially signifies that particular package.

The actual build recipe will be in `build.nix` and `default.nix` will import this file to perform the build.

First create a `build.nix` file like this:

```nix
{
  buildPythonApplication,
  setuptools-scm,
  flask,
}:

buildPythonApplication {
  pname = "shared_project";
  version = "0.0.1";
  format = "pyproject";
  src = builtins.path { path = ./.; name = "shared_project_source"; };
  propagatedBuildInputs = [
    setuptools-scm
    flask
  ];
}
```

The Nix expression in this file is a _function_ that produces a derivation.
This method of defining builds is a common design pattern in the Nix community, and is the format used throughout the `nixpkgs` repository.

> This particular derivation builds your Python application and ensures that `flask`, the library used to create the web application, is available at runtime for the application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This particular derivation builds your Python application and ensures that `flask`, the library used to create the web applications, is available at runtime.
```

Maybe not necessary to repeat that it's for the application.

> Note that on line 11 of the `build.nix` file the `src` attribute is set using `builtins.path`.
> This is a good habit to form because it will give your build a fixed name rather than simply inheriting the name of the parent directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that on line 11 of the `build.nix` file the `src` attribute is set using `builtins.path` to ensure that the store path of the build's [source directory stays independent of the containing directory name](...).
```

We can just link to that page here: https://nix.dev/recipes/best-practices#reproducible-source-paths

Finally, create a `default.nix` that looks like this:

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {};
in
  {
    build = pkgs.python3Packages.callPackage ./build.nix {};
  }
```

> The `callPackage` function reads the expression in `build.nix` to determine which inputs it needs (in this case, `buildPythonApplication`, `setuptools-scm`, and `flask`), then calls the expression with the inputs that were requested.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`callPackage` determines which arguments the function in `build.nix` takes (in this case, `buildPythonApplication`, `setuptools-scm`, and `flask`), then calls it with the corresponding attributes from `pkgs.python3Packages`.
```

You can read more about `callPackage` in the [Nix Pills][nix_pills_callpackage].

> Also note that this `default.nix` returns an attribute set with a single attribute called `build`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Also note that this `default.nix` returns an attribute set with a single attribute called `build`.
This allows adding more attributes later without breaking existing consumers.
```

Try to build this project by running `nix-build -A build`

[nix_pills_callpackage]: https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/callpackage-design-pattern.html

## Adding development packages

As mentioned earlier, you'll want to add some development packages.
Edit `default.nix` to look like this:

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {};
  build = pkgs.python3Packages.callPackage ./build.nix {};
in
  {
    inherit build;
    shell = pkgs.mkShell {

>       inputsFrom = [build];

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      inputsFrom = [ build ];
```

      packages = with pkgs.python3Packages; [
        black
        flake8
      ];
    };
  }
```

Let's break this all down.

The `pkgs.mkShell` function produces a shell environment, and it's common to put the expression that calls this function in a `shell.nix` file by itself.
However, doing so means that you to declare `pkgs = ...` a second time (first in `default.nix`, then again in `shell.nix`) and if you're pinning `nixpkgs` to a particular revision you may forget to update one of the declarations.

> By putting the `build` declaration on line 3 you're able to use it throughout the attribute set that spans lines 5-14.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By putting the `build` declaration in the `let` binding on line 3 you're able to use it throughout the attribute set that spans lines 5-14.
```

Lines 7-13 produce the shell environment for working on the project.

The real magic is the `inputsFrom` attribute passed to `mkShell` on line 8, which allows you to include build inputs from other derivations in your shell.
**This is what allows you to not repeat yourself.**

Finally, the `packages` attribute passed to `mkShell` is where you list any executable packages you'd like to be available in your shell.

Now create a `shell.nix` file with the following contents:

```nix
(import ./default.nix).shell
```

Since `default.nix` produces an attribute set, the `shell.nix` file is able to evaluate `default.nix` and simply access the `shell` attribute.

Now you can build the project by running `nix-build -A build` and you can enter the shell simply by running `nix-shell`.

## Testing out the shell

Enter the shell with the `nix-shell` command, then verify that you have the `flake8` and `black` programs available:

```console
$ nix-shell
...lots of output from the build
$ which flake8
/nix/store/vmp3jii75jqmi7vi9mg3v9ackal6wl4i-python3.10-flake8-6.0.0/bin/flake8
$ which black
/nix/store/q9vw01b2jz8h7kjq603hs3lz90i4d6d8-python3.10-black-23.1.0/bin/black
```

> These are the Nix store paths on the author's machine at the time of writing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These are the Nix store paths on the machine of this article's author at the time of writing.
```

You will likely see different store paths and versions depending on when you execute these commands and the architecture of the machine that the commands are executed on.

> ## Where to next?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Next steps

```
